The characteristic landscape of the Alps has fascinated generations of
explorers, artists, mountaineers and scientists with its diversity. From
the large piedmont lakes, to U-shaped glacial valleys, and the perched mountain
cirques, much of the spectacular topography of the Alps is the work of erosion
by ancient glaciers. Glacier erosion, however, is a slow process occurring
under hundreds of metres of ice. Measurements of glacier erosion are rare and
often indirect, but they indicate a link between the glacier velocity and the
erosion rate.

This link is the foundation for our study. Using previous results from a
supercomputer simulation of ancient Alpine glaciers, including the glacier
velocities, we attempt to quantify glacier erosion in the Alps from 120000
years ago to the present. After testing several velocity-erosion relationships
we conclude that our numbers are very uncertain. Yet from the consistent
patterns of modelled glacier erosion, we draw several conclusions.

The periods of maximum glacier extension do not correspond to maximum erosion.
Instead, glacier erosion slows down during periods of glacier advance,
and it accelerates during periods of glacier retreat. These variations are
caused by changes in the glacier slope, which control the gravitational force
driving glacier sliding. This shows that an increase of glacier erosion can be
expected with glacier retreat.

Besides, the modelled glacier erosion is often strongly localized, and the area
where it occurs moves in and out and up and down the mountain range as glaciers
shrink and grow. This indicates that piedmont lakes, glacial valley and
mountain cirques likely were not carved simultaneously but correspond to
different stages of glacier expansion.

----

Ancient Alpine glaciers have carved a fascinating landscape.

This study is an attempt to quantify glacier erosion in the Alps from 120000
years ago to the present.

Glacier erosion, however, is a slow process occurring
under hundreds of metres of ice which is very difficult to measure.

Despite uncertainties, our study shows that glaciers have constantly
evolved, so that mountain cirques, glacial valleys, and large piedmont lakes
instead all correspond to different states.

Interestingly, periods of maximum glacier extent do not systematically
correspond to more rapid erosion. Instead, glacier erosion slows down during
periods of glacier advance, and it accelerates during glacier retreat.

These variations are caused by changes in the glacier slope, which control the
gravitational force driving glacier sliding. This shows that an increase of
glacier erosion can be expected with glacier retreat.
